# Introduction

Bulk RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) is a widely used assay that captures the gene expression of a group of cells.
Its ability to capture gene expression directly from cells has made it a flexible technology that has been adopted across diverse scientific fields, from XX to XX.
Due to the open science movement and funding mandates, the majority of the raw sequencing data produced from these experiments is deposited in public databases like the Sequence Read Archive, making these data sets available to be re-analyzed in new studies.
To date, XXX Tb/Pb of RNA-seq data is available in the SRA (CITE).
However, while these data sets are publicly available, the data exist in raw formats that must be re-processed and are difficult to access in aggregate. 
Further, the metadata accompanying each data set is often incomplete or inaccurate, making data sets of interest difficult to find (CITE: SRA metadata).

To overcome these barriers, different communities of researchers have built compendia of gene expression experiments that unite many RNA-seq experiments through uniform pre-processing, enabling large-scale or cross-experiment re-analysis.
Compendia decrease time-to-insight for researchers by providing RNA-seq data and metadata in usable formats that are often smaller and more searchable than the source data.

Compendia built around human RNA-seq data have generated domain-specific biological insights and methodological advances for the analysis of gene expression data.
The Cancer Genome Atlas produced an improved taxonomy of cancer subtypes [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.042], recount2 was used to uncover pathways involved in rare diseases [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003] and improved the findability and accessibility of domain-specific samples [@doi:10.1038/s41598-019-56339-5], and GTex uncovered sex-specific determinants of gene expression [@doi:10.1126/science.aba3066].
Beyond facilitating (re)analysis for domain-specific applications, these compendia are frequently used in methods development or validation, especially for machine learning approaches that require many samples for model training [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giaa117; @doi:10.1101/2021.05.24.445440; @doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003; @doi:10.1101/2021.07.05.450786v2; @doi:10.1186/s12859-020-3427-8; @doi:10.1101/2020.06.23.167999].
<!--These compendia have therefore passively influenced research outcomes by providing available data -->
Researchers chase the data that is available, limiting new tool development to human data sets. 
Other organisms would benefit from having really big compendias.

Compared to human gene expression, many fewer compendia exist for microbial gene expression data [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkv1251; @url:https://www.refine.bio; @doi:10.1101/2022.01.24.477642].
The compendia that have been built for bacterial species have been limited to model organisms, often using type strains as the reference [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkv1251; @url:https://www.refine.bio; @doi:10.1101/2022.01.24.477642].
This strategy generates blind spots for RNA-seq samples generated from genomes other than the reference strain [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.24.477642; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0145861].
Bacterial and archaeal species can have prolific strain variation between organisms [@doi:10.1038/s41579-020-0368-1].
Strain variation is any sub-species genomic variation that exists within genomes of a species, and can come in many forms like single nucleotide variants or small indels, different complements of genes, or genomic rearrangements [@doi:10.1038/s41579-020-0368-1].
Differences between a genome represented in an RNA-seq sample and the reference used for mapping results in reduced mapping rates, leading to either inaccurate gene counts or unobserved gene expression [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0180904; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0145861].

Determining the strain or species represented in an RNA-seq sample is also difficult.
This information impacts the selection of the reference used for read mapping and quantification.
While many RNA-seq samples have organism annotations, these labels are inconsistently reported at the species or strain level, are not reported within a standardized taxonomy, and may be inaccurate [@doi:10.1016/j.plantsci.2017.10.014; @doi:10.1038/sdata.2019.21].
These issues complicate the selection of a suitable reference and make it difficult to harmonize across studies.

If we can solve these problems, having a compendium of bacterial and archaeal RNA-seq data would probably have a lot of value.

+ insights from E. coli/pseudomonas
+ machine learning applications from human compendia

We built...


<!--
### unused text

The majority of compendia assembled to date are from model organisms (CITE).
Both human [@doi:10.1038/ng.2653; @doi:10.1038/ng.2764; @doi:10.1038/nbt.3838; @doi:10.1186/s13059-021-02533-6, @url:https://www.refine.bio] and bacterial [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkv1251; @url:https://www.refine.bio; @doi:10.1101/2022.01.24.477642] RNA-seq compendia use a single or a few reference genomes to infer gene counts and other compendia products.
While this works well for the human genome, this strategy generates blind spots for bacterial and archaeal transcriptomes generated from genomes other the reference strain [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.24.477642; @doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0145861].

Processing gene expression data into a compendia enables the application of machine learning methods to RNA-seq data.
Many of these methods have traditionally been inaccessible in this domain given the small sample sizes used in RNA-seq experiments.
This has been the case for human data, where compendia like recount2 [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3838] and recount3 [@doi:10.1186/s13059-021-02533-6] have been used to XXX (CITE: multiplier, sophie, ponyo, multiplier).
*Pseudomonas aeruginosa*...
Producing such a compendia for microbes would allow researchers to test and deploy their methods for microorganisms.

Some of the largest and most widely used gene expression compendia are from human RNA-seq data [@doi:10.1038/ng.2653; @doi:10.1038/ng.2764; @doi:10.1038/nbt.3838; @doi:10.1186/s13059-021-02533-6].
While these compendia have been used to derive domain-specific biological insights [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.042] (CITE MORE) and methodological advances in gene expression analysis (CITE: multiplier, ponyo, sophie, and phenoplier), the underlying methodology used to construct these compendia does not extend well to bacterial and archaeal organisms.
-->

    




+ Bacterial papers that need to be cited in the intro:
    + LS Trap
    + Colombos
    + refine.bio
    + TCOL
    
+ Human compendia and key insights
    + Recount/2/3
        + methods development (transfer learning model, sophie, ponyo)
        + gene network inference
    + GTEX [@doi:10.1038/ng.2653] (not the best consortium bc has genomic variants)
    + TCGA [@doi:10.1038/ng.2764]]
        + improved taxonomy of cancer types and subtypes [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.042]
        + catalog of genomic and molecular changes associated with specific types of cancer [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.042]
        + conserved and divergent oncogenic processes and pathways involved in the development of tumors [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.03.042; @doi:10.1038/ng.2764]