# Results

## Automated construction of isolate bacterial and archaeal RNA-seq compendium

We developed an automated pipeline to construct a compendium of isolate bacterial and archaeal RNA-seq data.
The pipeline begins by performing strain-level taxonomic profiling of each RNA-seq sample to identify dominant and contaminant genomes present in quality controlled short read FASTQ files. 
Using these profiles, the best species-level representative is selected, triggering the pipeline to build a reference pangenome to be used for read mapping. 
The reference pangenomes are built from all genomes matching a given species in the Genome Taxonomy Database rs207 (GTDB).
With genes from these pangenomes as a pseudo-reference transcriptome, the pipeline uses Salmon quasi mapping to produce gene counts, and extracts and saves unmapped reads.
The main product of the pipeline is a normalized ortholog count table that includes all processed samples. 
Additionally, to support cross-domain and domain-specific inquiries the pipeline allows flexible data outputs. 
These include strain- or species-specific count tables and interconversion between annotation formats (e.g. ortholog to reference genome). 


This resource contains 59,239 run accessions from 5,698 experiments representing XX organisms.

![
**Overview of the pipeline used to build the isolate bacterial and archaeal RNA-seq compendium.** 
](images/microberna_pipeline.png){#fig:pipeline}

## Potential results outline

1. Many RNA-seq samples are contaminated
    a. human
    b. other microbes (from the same biome?)
2. Inclusion of decoy transcripts from intergenic regions enables identification of polycistronic transcripts
3. Pangenome gene expression...
    a. Estimate size, etc. of pangenomes for all species that are in GTDB and have gene expression data sets.
    b. How many genes in the pangenome are observed in the transcriptome? How does this vary by species?
    c. Of core genes, how many are uniformly expressed? Does this vary by species?
    d. Identify horizontally transferred genes (abx, prophage) that are shared (and expressed) between species
4. other general ideas
    a. identification of conserved operons across species
    b. conserved and divergent ortholog co-expression patterns across species
    c. pathway enrichment analysis across environments (if most samples have metadata)

